---
layout: page
title: Poetry
---

1.
==
Do you understand now the need for absolution?
We are entombed in a ghostly past,
The slow drawl of that libation in our veins flowing,
until we are struck blind, insensate, dumb.
A bubbling in the mind draws in us crimson patterns,
Delicate like smears on the surface of Jupiter,
Like raw meat ripped from the still living.
Into those severed ears we speak,
"The foundations of the world may topple tomorrow,
Or in ten thousand years may stand.
Be glad of it!"

2.
==
There was a well-ordered structure.
Its visage crystalline, arrayed in sorted rows.
I knew it, and it was in sooth, sooth to say,
"I knew it. I knew it entire."
Delve in it, it would be unchanged.
See it from the farthest sky, it would be unchanged.
A rock, against which the waves beat and make
Intricate patterns of foam and air, the promise of nothing.

I thought it geometric symmetry, nothing left undescribed,
the beauty understood, no still-beating heart within.
The pulse is soft to hear. Hear it.
In it you smell the sea air, see
Vast stars above some benighted plain,
the grass green, the face of some lord stern visaged,
making the same cracking sound.

3.
==
Alighted on the moon's new leaf
Is an ancient butterfly, fragile in its
Frozen redemption, brittle to the
Dawning of the light.

Under an ice sun it was born, the caterpillar
slinking in its leaf, in the bed of
unnumbered hidden thoughts. It was born.
It was thought to hand, Athena's strange axe cuts
the Olympian mind, biding its sparks.

4.
==
Enemy! Sword of thy forefathers,
its notched with keen razors and flesh,
Blood upon the waters.
The voted sleeve pink, stained with
the iron of a man's heartstring.
Pluck at it! It will not play music for you.
Its edge is dulled. The rust aged blade
Rings an organ cacophony, the shouts of battle,
the bitten shield shivered, the canonical abstraction of
the one who targets the operational warfighter system
Operations of the crimson dying, the blood
tactical in the yolk light of the nether sun.
In the fires of the first warrior was the target acquired,
The first hunt in the shadow of the
support vector classification machine trained and ready,
the music of some other battle.

5.
==
What does meaning look like?
What sort of shrill cry does it speak when
it says to us, "I do not exist",
or "I am the only one who exists"?
Does it intone the dreary mass like a priest in the night?
Does it bellow,
"I was the one who will be first, who was last"
sewage in our ears, filth, muck, brass, or gold?
I think sometimes it clinks. But sometimes it murmurs.
Sometimes it bespeaks,
"Until the day you die there was
A garden grove perfumed.
But only at the gate where Gyges lives
will you see the shadow of your own creation."
And now meaning asks:

There was a garden grove
In the shadow of the creation of man.

6.
==
Again and again and again the piano chimes,
The voices in unison sing, "Orisons we will sing,
But not over and over again." but do we hear
the chimes again and again and again? Or do the voices
orisons sing, but not over and over again?
A racked beauteous plume rises over the waste,
and the darkened plain groans with its nothing matters.
Nothing matters move upon the plain. Plain to see
that nothing matters, upon the plain that moves.
In the fluff of the wooden sky, that sees
its pale blue overtaken by the sharp.

The voices in unison sing, "Over and over again,
until the ends of the earth we catch,
the orisons we in holy oath have dared
over and over we will sing them."
A beauteous plume rises over the waste.

7.
==
A scythe hangs over us. We are rested,
the clouds over us filled with rain
which dries our wet throats, empties
our full ballast, our desert places.
And we vomit out the nightless sky,
the cracked-open head spaces of the 
unillumined vast.
Vast. The mind must think itself hunger now,
Constellations of rigid mobile thought,
the lights fractal upon the deep.
The lights recurse upon the deep, a deep mirror
mirrored upon itself, a memory mirrored upon the deep.

8.
==
There's no typical revolution. No normal size.
No characteristic scale, the scales from our eyes removed
to the less majestic sordid corners of a
grand percolation, a vast spirit luminous dark,
lurching to the crevices of the world.

What is the world? Is it that which is the case?
Is the case that which is the world, or is it the case that
a thousand nets entrap the world,
quicken the blood that flows through veins of soul?
Flesh must have blood to begin a cancer.

A man shoots a man, or burns himself, and cracks a stone soul,
Screams at the gates of heaven or of hell, and crowns himself some head
of a Cult of Supreme Being, heart pumping
the strange envenomed blood of a new order,
that pretends to flow in new veins, new wine in old skins.
There is no typical revolution. No normal size. But every one remains the same.

A stone is only a stone when it can be cracked.
A mote is only a mote, until the avalanche starts.
But at the end of that avalanche, carefully inspect:
The mote remains a mote.

9.
==
A starry sky above, and moral law within.
See the moral law arrayed, mortal law,
Each heaven guide arraigned in chains,
Twinkling set gems in the black sky.
Why doesn't it all glow?
A red, a blue, black burning fissure, and above the globe
True fires of heaven blow in, writ in lead,
On coal paper bound in iron shackles.
The letters wriggle in their set, and point and wonder at
A rock man uncracked unbroken, who looks at them.
Shame. It's a poor rock which goes uncracked, polished, unused,
Unloved, in the sterile despair of an empty smooth soul.
For that void, a moral law above, and starry stars within.

10.
==
A shape within a shape. It floats in the vision,
To infinity, beyond our sight.
Move the one, all others follow,
Ponderous, some Pickwick fellow bobbing to our thought.
See the square, pick out its size. Never mind
The thousand million billion other squares, inset, outset, overlapping throughout.
And when you talk, talk only of some world
Where nothing rough can be touched, where the world
is that which is the case, where no fool says their thoughts
but is esteemed wise, some proverb man unloosed.

If you see, do you understand?
If you understand, do you see?
If you think you understand so much,
Why are you listening to me?

11.
==
The nature of the thought,
Coming out of the canyon for its own sake
Some grand evolution of the deep. Fathoms
unmeasured in the nature of play,
the bells ringing, passionate the grandeur of
an inner world unbidden.
They come out of what? A trailing fly flashes in red,
Ethereal in the brideless spawn of night.
A new dawn unveiled, a cold sun, a blue sun,
A new dawn unveiled, undying chill like night.
Hail the night, a foundation of Babylon,
bricks doomed as bright shining city conveys.
The walls painted with rubies, floors diamond,
The ceiling shone with glass. The outer structure of the world.

Some grand evolution of the deep. Fathoms
unmeasured in countless thoughts, they
defy Nature.
The bells ring, make passion to the grandeur
of an inner world unbidden. The outer structure,
the floors diamond, walls racked with the pain of rubies,
the ceiling shining with glass. A
cold sun, a blue sun. Hail the night.

12.
==
"The true life is absent.
But we are in the world."

I see face to face to someone,
and they see face to face with me, and see
in their sheperd face, a groove that patient
rethinking of the untutored takes
when they themselves might a liberation make
with a brave sound, lights out.

But a man from the desert said,
"You must think to your countrymen.
The loyalty of blood and water, the
soil and water of some surrender."
The face to face changes, becomes coarse, then fine.
At the end of the desert there was a scale.
It was arraigned to say, "there goes a man whose guilt
Is not greater than the feather.
It is so ordered."
The scale is gone. The desert remains.
I cannot see a single grain of sand.

